# Minc - The Minimal Compiler

Langauage compilers and interpreters are complex programs that can take years to develop. With Minc you can create one in a few hours ...

## Just how easy can it be?

A programming language in Minc consists of 5 components: **packages**, **types**, **symbols**, **statements** and **expressions**.
A programming langauge that can run hello world programs can be defined in less than 100 lines of code:

1) Define a package, so that your language can be imported in `minc`:

```C++
MincPackage HELLOWORLD_PKG("helloworld", [](BlockExprAST* pkgScope) {
	...
});
```

2) Define some types (Every language needs to have at least one):

```C++
defineType("string", &STRING_TYPE);
```

3) Define a few symbols (Here we define the meta-type of our string type, so that Minc knows how to interpret the statement template "print($E<string>)" below):

```C++
defineSymbol(pkgScope, "string", &META_TYPE, &STRING_META_TYPE);
```

4) Define the language's expressions:

```C++
defineExpr3(pkgScope, "$L",
	[](BlockExprAST* parentBlock, std::vector<ExprAST*>& params, void* exprArgs) {
		const char* value = getLiteralExprASTValue((LiteralExprAST*)params[0]);
		if (value[0] != '"' && value[0] != '\'')
			raiseCompileError("Non-string literals not implemented", params[0]);
		return Variable(&STRING_TYPE, new String(std::string(value + 1, strlen(value) - 2)));
	},
	[](const BlockExprAST* parentBlock, const std::vector<ExprAST*>& params, void* exprArgs) -> BaseType* {
		return &STRING_TYPE;
	}
);
```

5) Define the language's statements:

```C++
defineStmt2(pkgScope, "print($E<string>)",
	[](BlockExprAST* parentBlock, std::vector<ExprAST*>& params, void* stmtArgs) {
		String* const message = (String*)codegenExpr(params[0], parentBlock).value;
		std::cout << *message << '\n';
	}
);
```

Et voilà!

```C++
> import helloworld;
> print("Hello World!");
"Hello World!"
```

You just wrote a programming language!

Note: You may have noticed we didn't declare the "import" statement. This statement is the only predefined statement known to Minc (hence the term: *minimal* compiler).

## Where to go from here

Arbitrarily powerfull programming languages can be designed using the same 5 components as our `helloworld` language. Arithmetic expressions, "if" statements, "class" types, ... Just add as many as you like.

The Paws programming language is an excellent reference on how to implement many of the classic programming language constructs, but feel free to be creative!

## Features

**TODO**

## Limitations

### Compiling source code

You say compiler, but all Minc does is interpret source code...
Correct, at it's current stage Minc consists only of lexer, parser and code generator. To upgrade your langauage to a compiled language, you need to emit intermediary byte-code or a program binary (e.g. using LLVM) in your statements and expressions. In the future this will be (optionally) handled by a separate part of Minc

**TODO: Write heLLVMoworld using LLVM**

### Selecting a parser

One of the many bold goals of Minc is to be able to compile any programming language in existance, but even an infinite improbability drive requires coordinates [Quote](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0371724/quotes/qt0351150).

These coordinates are the language grammar. Currently statements and expressions aren't interpreted from raw source code, but from a static abstract syntax tree (AST), generated by a parser ([GNU Bison](https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/)). The difference between Minc's parser and any regular parser for a static language is that Minc's parsers are designed to be as flexible as possible within the boundaries of the underlying language. They can be seen as laying some ground rules for the language. For example: C-flavored languages delimit lines with ";" and surround blocks with "{ ... }", while Python-flavored languages specify blocks with ":" and increased indentation.

At the moment Minc supports two parsers:

* C-Parser
* Python-Parser

The language flavor can only be switched between files. A parser-free interpreter that directly matches statements and expressions from source code is one of the stretch goals of Minc. It will allow switching flavors anywhere in code and can truly compile any language (even textual data file formats, like Markdown or XML).

Until that time being restricted by the lean boundaries of the Minc parsers should be seen as more of an advantage than a hindrance. (The more unrestricted your language, the more your users (the programmers) have to scratch their heads before they can efficiently code with it.)

**TODO: Rename parsers "styles" or "flavors"**
