# Limitations

## Compiling source code

Minc matches source code against statements and expressions and executes associated code kernels. To improve execution performance, most modern languages don't execute such kernels directly, but rather emit an intermediate byte-code or compiled program binary that can then be executed separately. LLVM is a powerful compiler framework used by many languages such as Go and Ruby. The [helloworld-llvm](examples/helloworld/helloworld-llvm/helloworld-llvm.cpp) extends our helloworld example to produce executable program binaries.

## Selecting a parser

One of the many bold goals of Minc is to be able to compile any programming language in existence, but even an infinite improbability drive requires coordinates [Quote](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0371724/quotes/qt0351150).

These coordinates are the language grammar. Currently statements and expressions aren't interpreted from raw source code, but from a static abstract syntax tree (AST), generated by a parser ([GNU Bison](https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/)). The difference between Minc's parser and any regular parser for a static language is that Minc's parsers are designed to be as flexible as possible within the boundaries of the underlying language. They can be seen as laying some ground rules for the language. For example: C-flavored languages delimit lines with ";" and surround blocks with "{ ... }", while Python-flavored languages specify blocks with ":" and increased indentation.

At the moment Minc supports three parsers:

* C-Parser
* Python-Parser
* Go-Parser

The language flavor can only be switched between files. A parser-free resolver that directly matches statements and expressions from source code is one of the stretch goals of Minc. It will allow switching flavors anywhere in code and can truly compile any language (even textual data file formats, like Markdown or XML).

Until that time being restricted by the lean boundaries of the Minc parsers should be seen as more of an advantage than a hindrance. (The more unrestricted your language, the more your users (the programmers) have to scratch their heads before they can efficiently code with it.)

Here are the main differences between the parsers:

|							| C-Parser					| Python-Parser				| Go-Parser					|
|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| Statement terminator		| ';'						| '\n'						| '\n' or ';'				|
| Block syntax				| '{' ... '}'				| ':' and indentation		| '{' ... '}'				|

**TODO: Rename parsers "styles" or "flavors"**